good evening
this is frank mcgee nbc news in
washington this is the second in a
series of programs unmatched in history
never have so many people seen the major
candidates for president of the united
states at the same time and never until
this series have americans seen the
candidates in face-to-face exchange
tonight the candidates have agreed to
devote the full hour to answering
questions on any issue of the campaign
and here tonight are the republican
candidate vice president richard m nixon
and the democratic candidate senator
john f kennedy
now representatives of the candidates
and of all the radio and television
networks have agreed on these rules
neither candidate will make an opening
statement or a closing summation each
will be questioned in turn each will
have an opportunity to comment upon the
answer of the other each reporter will
ask only one question in turn he is free
to ask any question he chooses neither
candidate knows what questions will be
asked and only the clock will determine
who will be asked the last question
these programs represent an
unprecedented opportunity for the
candidates to present their philosophies
and programs directly to the people and
for the people to compare these and the
candidates the four reporters on
tonight's panel include a newspaperman
and a wire service representative these
two were selected by lot by the press
secretaries of the candidates from
among the reporters traveling with the
candidates the broadcasting
representatives were selected by their
respective companies the reporters are
paul niven of cbs edward p morgan of
abc alvin spivak of united press
international and harold r levy of
newsday the first question is from mr niven and
is for vice president nixon mr vice
president senator kennedy said last
night that the administration must take
responsibility for the loss of cuba
would you compare the validity of that
statement with the validity of your own
statements in previous campaigns that
the truman administration was
responsible for the loss of china to the
communists well first of all i don't agree
with senator kennedy that cuba is lost
and certainly china was lost when this
administration came into power in 1953
as i look at cuba today i believe that
we are following the right course a
course which is difficult but a course
which under the circumstance is the only
proper one which will see that the cuban
people get a chance to realize their
aspirations of progress through freedom
and that they get that with our
cooperation with the other of
the states in the organization of
american states now senator kennedy has
made some very strong criticisms of my
part or alleged part in what has
happened in cuba
he points to the fact that i visited
cuba while mr batista was in power
there i can only point out that if we
are going to judge the administrations
in terms of our attitude toward
dictators we're glad to have a
comparison with the previous
administration there were 11
dictators in south america and in
central america when we came in in 1953
today there are only three left
including the one in cuba we think
that's pretty good progress
senator kennedy also indicated with
regard to cuba that he thought that i
had made a mistake when i was in cuba
in not calling for free elections in
that country
now i'm very surprised that senator kennedy
who is on the foreign relations
committee would have made such a
statement of this kind as a matter of
fact in his book the strategy for peace
he took the right position and that
position is that the united states has a
treaty a treaty with all of the
organization of american states which
prohibits us from interfering in the
internal affairs of any other state and
prohibits them as well for me to have
made such a statement would been in direct uh
opposition to that treaty now with
regard to cuba let me make one thing
very clear there isn't any question but
that we will defend our rights there
there isn't any question but that we will
defend guantanamo if it's attacked there
also isn't any question but that the
free people of cuba the people who want
to be free are going to be supported and
that they will attain their freedom no
cuba is not lost and i don't think this
kind of defeatist talk by senator
kennedy helps the situation one bit
senator kennedy would you care to
comment in the first place i've never
suggested that cuba was lost except for
the present in my speech last night i
indicated that i thought that cuba one
day again would be free where i've been
critical of the administration's policy
and where i criticized mr nixon was
because in his press conference in havana
in 1955 he praised the competence and
stability of the batista
dictatorship that dictatorship had
killed over 20,000 cubans in seven years
secondly i did not criticize him for not
calling for free elections what i
criticized was the failure of the
administration to use its great
influence to persuade the cuban
government to hold free elections
particularly in 1957 and 1958 thirdly
arthur gardner a republican ambassador
earl smith a republican ambassador in
succession both have indicated in the
past six weeks that they reported to
washington that castro was a marxist that
raul castro was a communist and that
they got no effective result instead our
aid continued to batista which was
ineffective we never were on the side of freedom we never
used our influence when we could have
used it most effectively and today
cuba is lost for freedom i hope someday
it will rise but i don't think it will
rise if we continue the same policies
towards cuba that we did in recent years
and in fact towards all of latin america
when we've almost ignored the needs of
latin america we've beamed not a single voice
of america program in spanish to all of
latin america in the last eight years
except for the three months of the
hungarian uh revolution
mr morgan with a question for senator
kennedy senator last may in oregon you
discussed the possibilities of sending
apologies or regrets to khrushchev over
the u-2 incident do you think now that
that would have done any good did you
think so then mr morgan i suggested
that if the united states felt that it
could save the summit conference that it
would have been proper for us to have expressed regret
in my judgment that statement has been
distorted uh by mr nixon and others in
their debates around the country and in
their discussions mr lodge on meet the
press a month ago said if there was ever
a case when we did not have law on our
side it was in the u-2 incident the u-2
flights were proper from the point of
view of protecting our security but they
were not in accordance with
international law and i said that i felt
that rather than tell the lie which we
told rather than indicate that the
flights would continue in fact i believe
mr nixon himself said on may 15th that
the flights would continue even though
mr herter testified before the senate
foreign relations committee that they
had been canceled as of may 12th that it would
have been far better that if we had
expressed regret if that would have
saved the summit and if the summit is
useful and i believe it is the point
that is always left out is the fact that
we expressed regrets to castro this
winter that we expressed regrets the
eisenhower administration expressed
regrets for a flight over southern russia
in 1958 we expressed regrets for a
flight over eastern germany under this
administration the soviet union in 1955
expressed regrets to us over the bering
sea incident the chinese communists
expressed regrets to us over a plane
incident in 1956 that is the accepted
procedure between nations and my
judgment is that we should follow the
advice of theodore roosevelt
be strong maintain a strong position but
also speak softly i believe that in
those cases where international custom
calls for the expression of a regret if
that would have kept the summit going in
my judgment it was a proper action it's
not appeasement it's not soft i believe
we should be stronger than we now are i
believe we should have a stronger
military force i believe we should
increase our strength all over the world
but i don't confuse words with strength
and in my judgment if the summit was
useful if it would have brought
us closer to peace that rather than the lie that
we told which has been criticized by all
responsible people afterwards it would
have been far better for us to follow
the common diplomatic procedure of
expressing regret and then try to move
on mr vice president i think
senator kennedy is wrong on three counts
first of all he's wrong in thinking
they're even suggesting that mr
khrushchev might have continued the conference if
we had expressed regrets he knew these
flights were going on long before and
that wasn't the reason that he broke up
the conference second he's wrong in the
analogies that he makes the united
states is a strong country whenever we
do anything that's wrong we can express
regrets but when the president of the
united states is doing something that's
right something that is for the purpose
of defending the security of this
country against surprise attack he can
never express regrets or apologize to
anybody including mr khrushchev now
in that connection senator kennedy has
criticized the president on the ground
not only of not expressing regrets but
because he allowed this flight to take
place while the summit conference or
immediately before the summit conference
occurred this seems to me is criticism
that again is wrong on his part
we all remember pearl harbor we lost
3,000 american lives
we cannot afford an intelligence gap and
i just want to make my position
absolutely clear with regard to getting
intelligence information i don't intend
to see to it that the united states is
ever in a position where while we're
negotiating with the soviet union that
we discontinue our intelligence effort
and i don't intend ever to express
regrets to mr khrushchev or anybody
else if i'm doing something that has
the support of the congress and that is
right for the purpose of protecting the
security of the united states mr
spivak with a question for vice president
nixon mr vice president you have
accused senator kennedy of avoiding the
civil rights issue when he has been in
the south and he has accused you of the
same thing with both north and south
listening and watching would you sum up
uh your own intentions in the field of
civil rights if you become president
my intentions in the field of civil
rights have been spelled out in the
republican platform i think we have to
make progress first in the field of
employment and there we would give
statutory authority to the committee on
government contracts which is an
effective way of getting real progress
made in this area since about one out of
every four jobs is held by and is
allotted by people who have government
contracts certainly i think all of us
agree that when anybody has a government
contract certainly the money that is
spent under that contract ought to be
disbursed equally without regard to the
race or creed or color of the individual
who is to be employed second in the
field of schools we believe that there
should be provisions whereby the federal
government would give assistance to
those districts who do want to integrate
their schools that of course was
rejected as was the government contracts
provision by the special session of the
congress through in which mr kennedy
was quite active and then as far as
other areas are concerned i think that
we have to look to presidential
leadership now when i speak of
presidential leadership
i refer for example in our attitude on
the sit-in strikes here we have a
situation which causes all of us
concern causes us concern because of
the denial of the rights of people to
the equality which we think belongs to
everybody i have talked to negro mothers
i've heard them explain try to explain
how they tell their children how they
can go into a store and buy a loaf of
bread but then can't go into that store
and sit at the counter and get a
coca-cola this is wrong and we have to
do something about it so under the
circumstances what do we do well what we
do is what the attorney general of the
united states did under the direction of
the president call in the owners of
chain stores and get them to take action
now there are other places where the
executive can lead but let me just sum
up by saying this why do i talk every
time i'm in the south on civil rights
not because i am preaching to the people
of the south because this isn't just a
southern problem it's a northern problem
and a western problem it's a problem for
all of us i do it because it's the
responsibility of leadership i do it
because we have to
solve this problem together i do it right at
this time particularly because when we
have khrushchev in this country a man who
has enslaved millions a man who has
slaughtered thousands we cannot continue
to have a situation where he can point
the finger at the united states of
america and say that we are denying
rights to our citizens
and so i say both the candidates and
both the vice presidential candidates i
would hope as well including senator
johnson should talk on this issue at
every opportunity senator kennedy well
mr nixon hasn't discussed the two basic
questions what is going to be done and
what will be his policy on implementing
the supreme court decision of 1954
giving aid to schools technically that
are trying to carry out the decision is
not the great question secondly what's
he going to do to provide fair
employment he's been the head of the
committee on government contracts that's
carried out two cases both in the
district of columbia he has not
indicated his support of an attempt to
provide fair employment practices around
the country so that everyone can get a
job regardless of their race or color nor
has he indicated that he will support
title three which would give the
attorney general additional powers to
protect constitutional rights these are
the great questions equality of
education in school about two percent of our
population of white people are is illiterate 10
percent of our colored population 60 to
70 percent of our colored children
do not finish high school these are the
questions in these areas that the north
and the south east and west are entitled
to know what will be the leadership of
the president in these areas to provide
equality of opportunity for employment
equality of opportunity in the field of
housing which could be done on all
federal supported housing by a stroke of
the president's pen what will be done to
provide equality of education in all
sections of the united states those are
the questions to which the president
must establish a moral tone and moral
leadership and i can assure you that if
i'm elected president we will do so mr
levy with a question for senator kennedy
senator on the same subject in the past
you have emphasized the president's
responsibility as a moral leader as well
as an executive on civil rights
questions what specifically might the
next president do
uh in the event of an uh an occurrence such as
little rock or the lunch-counter sit-ins
from the standpoint of well let me say that i think the president
operates in a number of different areas
first as a legislative leader and as i
just said that i believe that the passage of
the so-called title three which gives
the attorney general the power to
protect constitutional rights in those
cases where it's not possible for the
person involved to bring the suit
secondly as an executive leader there
have been only six cases brought by this
attorney general under the voting bill
passed in 1957 and the voting bill
passed in 1960 the right to vote is
basic i do not believe that this
administration has implemented those
bills which represent the will of the
majority of the congress on two occasion
with vigor thirdly i don't believe that
the government contracts division is
operated with vigor everyone who does
business with the government should have
the opportunity to make sure that they
do not practice discrimination in their
hiring and that's in all sections of the
united states and then fourthly as a
moral leader there is a very strong
moral basis for this concept of equality
before the law not only equality before
the law but also equality of opportunity
we are in a very difficult time we need
all the talent we can get we sit on a
conspicuous stage we are a goldfish bowl
before the world we have to practice
what we preach we set a very high
standard for ourselves the communists do
not they set a low standard of
materialism we preach in the declaration
of independence and in the constitution in
the statement of our greatest leaders we
preach very high standards and if
we're not going to be charged before the
world with hypocrisy we have to meet
those standards i believe the president
of the united states should indicate it
now lastly i believe in the case of
little rock i would have hoped that the
president of the united states would
have been possible for him to indicate
it clearly that the supreme court
decision was going to be carried out i
would have hoped it'd have been possible
to use marshals to do so but it
evidently uh under the handling of the case
it was not i would hope an incident like
that would not happen i think if the
president is responsible if he consults
with those involved if he makes it clear
that the supreme court decision is going
to be carried out in a way that the
supreme court planned with deliberate speed
then in my judgment providing he's
behind action i believe we can make uh progress
now the present administration the
president has said never indicated what
he thought of the 1954 decision unless
the president speaks then of course uh the
country doesn't speak and franklin
roosevelt said the presidency of the
united states is above all a place of
moral leadership and i believe on this
great moral issue he should speak out
and give his views clearly mr vice
president senator kennedy has expressed
some high hopes in this field hopes
which i think all americans would share
who want some problem some progress in
this area but let's look at the
performance when he selected his vice
presidential running mate he selected a
man who had voted against most of these
proposals and a man who opposes them at
the present time
let me look also at what i did i
selected a man who stands with me in
this field and who will talk with me and
work with me on it now the senator referred
to the committee on government contracts
and yet that very committee of which i
am chairman has been handicapped by the
fact that we have not had adequate funds
we have not had adequate powers we
haven't had an adequate staff now in the
special session of congress and also in
the session that preceded it the
democratic congress in which there's a
two-to-one democratic majority was asked
by the president to give us the funds
and give us the power to do a job and
they did nothing at all and in the
special session in which senator kennedy
was calling the signals along with senator
johnson they turned it down and he
himself voted against giving us the
powers despite the fact that the bill had
already been considered before that it
already had hearings on and the congress
already knew what it had before it all
that i can say is this what we need here
are not just high hopes what we need is
action and in the field of executive
leadership i can say that i believe it's
essential that the president of the united
states not only set the tone but he also
must lead he must act as he talks mr
morgan with a question for vice
president nixon mr vice president in
your speeches you emphasize that the
united states is doing basically
well in the cold war can you square that
statement with a considerable mass of
bipartisan reports and studies including
one prominently participated in by
governor rockefeller which almost
unanimously conclude that we are not
doing nearly so well as we should mr
morgan no matter how well we're doing in
the cold war we're not doing as well as
we should and that will always be the
case as long as the communists are on
the international scene in the
aggressive tendencies that they
presently are following now as far as
the present situation is concerned i
think it's time that we nail a few of
these distortions about the united
states that have been put out first of
all we hear that our prestige is at an
all-time low senator kennedy has been
hitting that point over and over again i
would just suggest that after premier
khrushchev's performance in the
united nations compared with president
eisenhower's eloquent speech that at the
present time communist prestige in the
world is at an all-time low and american
prestige is at an all-time high now that
of course is just one factor but it's a
significant one when we look for example
at the vote on the congo we were on
one side they were on the other side
what happened there were 70 votes for
our position and none for theirs look at
the votes in the united nations over the
past seven and a half years that's a
test of prestige every time the united
states has been on one side and they've
been on the other side our position has
been sustained now looking to what we
ought to do in the future in this cold
war we have to recognize where it is
being fought and then we have to develop
programs to deal with it it's being fought
primarily in asia in africa and in latin
america what do we need what tools do we
need to fight it well we need for
example economic assistance we need
technical assistance we need exchange we
need programs of diplomatic and other
character which will be effective in
that area now senator kennedy a moment
ago referred to the fact that there was
not an adequate voice of america program
for latin america i'd like to point out
that in
the last six years the democratic congresses
of which he'd been a member have cut 20
million dollars off of the voice of
america programs they also have cut four
billion dollars off of mutual security
in these last six years they also have
cut two billion dollars off of defense
now when they talk about our record here
it is well that they recognize that they
have to stand up for their record as
well so let me summarize by saying this
i'm not satisfied with what we're doing
in the cold war because i believe we
have to step up our activities and
launch an offensive
for the minds and hearts and souls of
men it must be economic it must be
technological above all it must be
ideological but we've got to get help
from the congress in order to do this
senator kennedy of course mr nixon is wholly inaccurate
when he says that the congress has not
provided more funds in fact than the
president recommended for national
defense 1953 we tried to put an
appropriation of five billion dollars
for our defenses i was responsible for
the amendment with senator monroney
in 1954 to strengthen our ground forces
the congress of the united states
appropriated 677 million dollars more
than the president was willing to use up
till a week ago secondly on the question
of our position in the united nations we
all know about the vote held this week
of the five neutralists and it was
generally regarded as a defeat for the
united states thirdly in 1952 there were
only seven votes in favor of the
admission of red china into the united
nations last year there were 29 and
tomorrow when the preliminary vote is
held you will see a strengthening of
that position or very closely to it we
have not maintained our position and our
prestige a gallup poll taken in february
of this year asking the in eight out of
nine countries they asked the people who
do they think would be ahead by 1970
militarily and scientifically and a
majority in eight of the nine countries
said the soviet union would by 1970
governor rockefeller has been far more
critical in june of our position in the
world than i have been the rockefeller
brothers report
general ridgway general gavin the
gaither report various reports of
congressional committees all indicate
that the relative strength of the united
states both militarily politically
psychologically and scientifically and
industrially the relative strength of the
of the united states
compared to that of the soviet union and the
chinese communists together has
deteriorated in the last eight years and we
should know it and the american people
should be told the facts mr spivak
with a question for senator kennedy
senator uh following this up how would you
go about increasing the prestige
you say we're losing and could the
programs you've devised to do so be
accomplished without absolutely wrecking
our economy yes we have been wholly
indifferent to latin america until the
last few months the program that was put
forward this summer after we broke off
the sugar quota with cuba really was
done because we wanted to get through
the oas meeting a condemnation of
russian infiltration of cuba and
therefore we passed an authorization not
an aid bill which was the first time
really since the inter-american bank
which was founded a year ago was
developed that we really have looked at
the needs of latin america that we have
associated ourselves with those people
secondly i believe that in the that
it's far better for the united states
instead of concentrating our aid
particularly in the underdeveloped world
on surplus military equipment we
poured 300 million dollars of
surplus military equipment into laos
we paid more military aid more aid
into laos per per person than in any
country in the world and we ought to know now
that laos is moving from neutralism
in the direction of the communists i
believe instead of doing that we should
concentrate our aid in long-term loans
which these people can pay back either
in hard money or in local currency this
permits them to maintain their
self-respect it permits us to make sure
that the projects which are invested in
are going to produce greater wealth and i
believe that in cases of india and
africa and latin america that this is
where our emphasis should be i would
strengthen the development loan fund and
senator fulbright senator humphrey and i
tried to do that we tried to provide an
appropriation of a billion and a half for
five years on a long-term loan basis
which this administration opposed and unless
we're ready to carry out programs like
that in the 60s this battle for
economic survival which these people are
waging are going to be lost and if india
should lose her battle with 35 percent of the
people of the underdeveloped world
within her borders then i believe that
the balance of power could move
against us i think the united states can
afford to do these things i think that
we could not afford not to do these
things this goes to our survival and
here in a country which if it is moving
ahead if it's developing its economy to
the fullest which we are not now in my
judgment we'll have the resources to meet
our military commitment and also our
commitments overseas i believe it's
essential that we do it because in the
next 10 years the balance of power is
going to begin to move in the world from
one direction or another towards us or
towards the communists and unless we
begin to identify ourselves not only
with the anti-communist fight but also
with the fight against poverty and hunger
these people are going to begin to turn
to the communists as an example i
believe we can do it if we build our
economy the way we should we can afford
to do these things and we must do it mr
vice president
senator kennedy has put a great deal of
stress on the necessity for economic
assistance this is important but it's
also tremendously important to bear in
mind that when you pour in money without
pouring in technical assistance as
well that you have a disastrous
situation we need to step up exchange we
need to step up technical assistance so
that trained people in these newly
developing countries can operate the
economies we also have to have in mind
something else with regard to this whole
situation in the world and that is that
as america moves forward we not only
must think in terms of fighting
communism but we must also think
primarily in terms of the interests of
these countries we must associate
ourselves with their aspirations we must
let them know that the great american
ideals of independence of the right of
people to be free of the right to progress
that these are ideals that belong not to
ourselves alone but they belong to
everybody this we must get across to the
world and we can't do it unless we do
have adequate funds for for example
information which has been cut by the
congress adequate funds for technical
assistance the other point that i would
make with regard to economic assistance
and technical assistance is that the
united states must not rest its case
here alone this is primarily an
ideological battle a battle for the minds and the hearts
and the souls of men we must not meet
the communists purely in the field of
gross atheistic materialism we must
stand for our ideals mr levy with a
question for vice president nixon mr
vice president
the labor department today added five
more major industrial centers to the
list of areas with substantial
unemployment you said in new york this
week that as president you would use
the full powers of the government if
necessary to combat unemployment
specifically what measures would you
advocate and at what point to combat
unemployment we first must concentrate
on the very areas to which you refer the
so-called depressed areas now in the
last congress the special session of the
congress there was a bill one by the
president one by senator kennedy and
members of his party now the bill that
the president had submitted would have
provided more aid for those areas that
really need it areas like
scranton and wilkes-barre and the areas
of west virginia than the ones that
senator kennedy was supporting on the
other hand we found that the bill got
into the legislative difficulties and
consequently no action was taken
so point one at the highest priority we must
get a bill for depressed areas through
the next congress i have made
recommendations on that and i have
discussed them previously and i will
spell them out further in the campaign
second as we consider this problem of
unemployment we have to realize where it
is in analyzing the figures we will find
that our unemployment exists among the
older citizens it exists also among
those who are inadequately trained that
is those who do not have an adequate
opportunity for education it also exists
among minority groups if we're going to
combat unemployment then we have to do a
better job in these areas that's why i
have a program for education a program
in the case of equal job opportunities
and one that would also deal with our
older citizens
finally with regard to the whole problem of
combating recession as you call it
we must use the full resources of the
government in these respects one we must
see to it that credit is expanded as we
go into any recessionary period and
understand i do not believe we're going
into a recession
i believe this economy is sound and that
we're going to move up but second in
addition to that if we do get into a
recessionary period we should move on
that part of the economy which is
represented by the private sector and i
mean stimulate that part of the economy
that can create jobs the private sector
of the economy
this means through tax reform and if
necessary tax cuts that will stimulate
more jobs i favor that rather than
massive federal spending programs which
will come into effect usually long after
you've passed through the recessionary
period so we must use all of these
weapons for the purpose of combating
recession if it should come but i do not
expect it to come senator kennedy well
mr nixon has stated the record
inaccurately in regard to the depressed
area bill i'm very familiar with it it
came out of the committee of which i was
the chairman the labor subcommittee in
55 i was the floor manager we passed
an area redevelopment bill far more
effective than the bill the
administration suggested on two
occasions and the president vetoed it
both times we passed a bill again this
year in the cong in the senate and it
died in the rules committee of the house
of representatives let me make it very
clear that the bill that mr nixon
talked about did not mention wilkes-barre
or scranton
it did not mention west virginia our
bill was far more effective the bill
introduced and sponsored by senator
douglas was far more effective in trying
to stimulate the economy of those areas
secondly he has mentioned the problem of
our older citizens
i cannot still understand why this
administration and mr nixon oppose
putting medical care for the aged under
social security to give them some
security third i believe we should step
up the use of our surplus foods in these
areas until we're able to get the people
back at work five cents a day that's
what the food package averages per
person fourthly i believe we should
the economy i believe we should not
carry out a hard money high interest
rate policy which helped intensify
certainly the recession of 1958 and i
think helped bring the slowdown of 1960
if we move into a recession in 61 then i
would agree that we have to put more money
into the economy and it can be done by
either one of the two methods discussed
one is by programs such as aid to
education the other would be to make a
judgment on what's the most effective
tax program to stimulate our economy mr
niven with a question for senator
kennedy senator while a main theme of
your campaign has been this decline of
american power and prestige in the last
eight years you've hardly criticized
president eisenhower at all and in a speech
last weekend you said you had no quarrel
with the president now isn't mr
eisenhower and not mr nixon responsible
for any such decline well i understood
that this was the eisenhower-nixon
administration according to all the
republican uh propaganda that i've read the
question is what we're going to do in
the future i've been critical of this
administration and i've been critical of
the president in fact uh mr nixon
uh discussed that a week ago in a speech
i believe that our power and prestige in
the last eight years has declined now
what is the issue is what we're going to
do in the future
now that's an issue between mr nixon and
myself he feels that we're moving ahead
uh in a we're not going into a recession in
this country economically he feels that
our power and prestige is stronger than
it ever was relative to that of the
communists that we're moving ahead i disagree
and i believe the american people have to
make the choice on november 8th between
the view of whether we have to move
ahead faster whether what we're doing now
is not satisfactory whether we have to
build greater strength at home and
abroad and mr nixon's view that's the
great issue president eisenhower moves
from the scene on january 20th and the
next four years are the critical years
and that's the debate that's the
argument between mr nixon and
myself and on that issue the american
people have to make their judgment and i
think it's an important judgment i think
in many ways this election is more
important than any since 1932 or
certainly almost any in this century
because we disagree very fundamentally
on the position of the united states and
if his view prevails then i think that's
going to bring an important result to
this country in the 60s if our view
prevails that we have to do more that we have
to make a greater national
and international effort that we have lost
prestige in latin america the president
of brazil the new incumbent running for
office called on castro during his
campaign because he thought it was
important to get the vote of those who were
supporting castro in latin america in
africa the united states has ignored
latin uh africa we gave more
scholarships to the congo this summer we
offered them than we've given to all of
africa the year before less than 200 for all
the countries of africa and they need
trained leadership more than anything
we've been uh having a very clear decision
in the last eight years mr nixon has been part of
that administration he's had experience
in it and i believe this administration
has not met its responsibilities in the
last eight years that our power relative
to that of the communists is declining that
we're facing a very hazardous time in
the 60s and unless the united states begin to
move here unless we start to go ahead i
don't believe that we're going to meet
our responsibility to our own people
or to the cause of freedom i think the
choice is clear
and it involves the future mr vice
president first of all i think senator
kennedy should make up his mind with
regard to my responsibility in our
first debate he indicated that i had not
had experience or at least uh had not
participated significantly in the
making of the decisions i'm glad to hear
tonight that he does suggest that i have
had some experience let me make my
position clear i have participated in
the discussions leading the decisions in
this administration i'm proud of the
record of this administration i don't
stand on it because it isn't something
to stand on but something to build on
now looking at senator kennedy's
credentials he is suggesting that he
will move america faster and further
than i will but what does he offer
he offers retreads of programs that failed
i submit to you that as you look at his
programs his program for example with
regard to the federal reserve and uh free
money or loose money uh high low interest
rates his program in the economic field
generally are the programs that were
adopted and tried during the truman
administration and when we compare the
economic progress of this country in the
truman administration with that of the
eisenhower administration we find that
in every index
there has been a great deal more
performance and more progress in this
administration than in that one i say the
programs and the leadership that failed
then is not the program and the
leadership that america needs now i say
that the american people don't want to
go back to those policies and
incidentally if senator kennedy
disagrees he should indicate where he
believes those policies are different
from those he's advocating today mr
spivak with a question for vice
president nixon mr vice president
according to news dispatches soviet
premier khrushchev said today that prime
minister macmillan had assured him that
there would be a summit conference next
year after the presidential elections
have you given any cause for such
assurance and do you consider it
desirable or even possible that there
would be a summit conference next year
if mr khrushchev persists in the
conditions he's laid down no of course i
haven't talked to prime minister
macmillan it would not be appropriate
for me to do so the president is still
going to be president for the next four
months and he of course is the only one
who could commit this country in this
period as far as a summit conference
is concerned i want to make my position
absolutely clear i would be willing as
president to meet with mr khrushchev or
any other world leader if it would serve
the cause of peace i would not be able
would be willing to meet with him
however unless there were preparations
for that conference which would give us
some reasonable certainty some
reasonable certainty that you were going
to have some success we must not build
up the hopes of the world and then dash
them as was the case in paris there mr
khrushchev came to that conference
determined to break it up he was going
to break it up because he would knew
that he wasn't going to get his way on
berlin and on the other key matters with
which he was concerned at the paris
conference now if we're going to have
another summit conference there must be
negotiations at the diplomatic level the
ambassadors the secretaries of state and
others at that level prior to that time
which will delineate the issues and
which will prepare the way for the heads
of state to meet and make some progress
otherwise if we find the heads of state
meeting and not making progress
we will find that the cause of peace
will have been hurt rather than helped
so under these circumstances i therefore
strongly urge and i will strongly hold
if i have the opportunity to urge or to
hold this position that any summit
conference would be gone into only after
the most careful preparation and only
after mr khrushchev after his
disgraceful conduct at paris after his
disgraceful conduct at the united
nations gave some assurance that he
really wanted to sit down and talk and
to accomplish something and not just to
make propaganda senator kennedy i have no
disagreement with the vice president's
position on that it my view is the same as
his let me say there is only one uh point i
would add that before we go into the
summit before we ever meet again i think
it's important that the united states
build its strength that it build its military
strength as well as its own economic
strength if we negotiate from a position
where the power balance or wave is
moving away from us it's extremely
difficult to reach a successful decision
on berlin as well as the other questions
now the next president of the united
states in his first year is going to be
confronted with a very serious question
on our defense of berlin our commitment
to berlin it's going to be a test of our
nerve and will it's going to be a test
of our strength and because we're going to
move in 61 and two partly because we have
not maintained our strength with
sufficient vigor in the last years i
believe that before we meet that crisis
that the next president of the united
states should send a message to congress
asking for a revitalization of our
military strength because come spring or
late in the winter we're going to
be face to face with the most serious
berlin crisis since 1949 or 50 on the
question of the summit i agree with the
position of mr nixon i would not meet
mr khrushchev unless there were some
agreements at the secondary level foreign
ministers or ambassadors which would
indicate that the meeting would have
some hope of success or a useful
exchange of ideas
mr levy with a question for senator
kennedy senator in your acceptance
speech at los
angeles you said that your campaign would
be based not on what you intend to offer
the american people but what you intend to
ask of them since that time you have
spelled out many of the things that you
intend to do but you have made only
vague reference through sacrifice and
self-denial a year or so ago i believe
you said that you would not hesitate to
recommend a tax increase if you
considered it necessary is this what you
have in mind
well i don't think that in the winter of
61 under present economic conditions it
a tax increase would be desirable in
fact it would be deflationary it would
cause great unemployment it would cause a
real slowdown in our economy if it ever
becomes necessary and is wise
economically and essential to our
security i would have no hesitancy in
suggesting a tax increase or any other
policy which would defend the united
states i have talked in every speech
about the fact that these are going to
be very difficult times in the 1960s and
that we're going to have to meet our
responsibilities as citizens i'm talking
about a national mood i'm talking about
our willingness to bear any burdens in
order to maintain our own freedom and in
order to meet our freedom around the
globe we don't know what the future's
going to bring but i would not want
anyone to elect me uh president of the
united states or vote for me under the
expectation that life would be easier if i
were elected now many of the programs
that i'm talking about economic growth
care for the aged development of our
natural resources build the strength of
the united states that's how the united
states began to prepare for its great
actions in world war ii and in the
post-war period if we're moving ahead if
we're providing a viable economy if our
people have sufficient resources so that
they can consume what we produce
then this country's on the move then
we're stronger then we set a better
example to the world so we have the
problem not only of building our own
uh military strength and extending uh our policies
abroad we have to do a job here at home
so i believe that the policies that i
recommend come under the general heading
of strengthening the united states we're
using our steel capacity 55 percent
today we're not able to consume what
we're able to produce at a time when the
soviet union is making great economic
gains and all i say is i don't know what the
60s will bring except i think they will
bring hard times in the uh international
sphere i hope we can move ahead here at
home in the united states i'm confident
we can do a far better job of mobilizing
our economy and resources in the united
states and i merely say that they if they
elect me president
i will do my best to carry the united
states through a difficult period but i
would not want people to elect me
because i promised them the easy soft
life i think it's going to be difficult
but i'm confident that this country can
meet its responsibilities mr vice
president well i think we should be no under no
illusions whatever about what the
responsibilities of the american people
will be in the 60s our expenditures for
defense our expenditures for mutual
security our expenditures for economic
assistance and technical assistance are
not going to get less in my opinion
they're going to be greater i think it
may be necessary that we have more taxes
i hope not i hope we can economize
elsewhere so that we don't have to but i
would have no hesitation to ask the
american people to pay the taxes even in
1961 if necessary to maintain a sound
economy and also to maintain a sound
dollar because when you do not tax and
tax enough to pay for your outgo you
pay it many times over in higher prices
and inflation and i simply will not do
that i think i should also add that as
far as senator kennedy's proposals are
concerned if he intends to carry out his
platform the one adopted in los angeles
it is just impossible for him to make
good on those promises without raising
taxes or without having a rise in
prices or both the platform suggests that
it can be done through economic growth
that it can be done in effect with
mirrors but it isn't going to be working
that way you can't add billions of
dollars to our expenditures and not pay
for it after all it isn't paid for by my
money it isn't paid for by his but by
the people's money mr niven with a
question for vice president nixon
mr vice president you said that while
mr khrushchev is here senator kennedy
should talk about what's right with this
country as well as what's wrong with the
country in the 1952 campaign when you were
republican candidate for vice
president and we were at war with the
communists did you feel a similar
responsibility to talk about what was
right with the country i did and as i
pointed out in 1952 i made it very
clear that as far as the korean war was
concerned that i felt that the decision
to go into the war in korea was right
and necessary what i criticized were the
policies that made it necessary to go to
korea now incidentally i should point
out here that senator kennedy has
attacked our foreign policy he's said that
it's been a policy that has led to
defeat and retreat and i'd like to know
where have we been defeated and where have we
retreated in the truman administration
600 million people went behind the iron
curtain including the satellite
countries of eastern europe and
communist china in this administration
we've stopped them at quemoy and matsu we've
stopped them in indochina we've stopped
them in lebanon we've stopped them in other
parts of the world i would also like to
point out that as far as senator
kennedy's comments are concerned i think
he has a perfect right and a
responsibility to criticize this
administration whenever he thinks we're
wrong but he has a responsibility to be
accurate and not to misstate the case i
don't think he should say that our
prestige is at an all-time low i think this
is very harmful at a time mr khrushchev
is here harmful because it's wrong i
don't think it was helpful when he
suggested and i'm glad he's corrected
this to an extent that 17 million people
go to bed hungry every night in the
united states now this just wasn't true
now there are people who go to bed
hungry in the united states far less
incidentally than used to go to bed
hungry when we came into power at the
end of the truman administration but the
thing that is right about the united
states it should be emphasized is that
less people go to bed hungry in the
united states than in any major country
in the world
we're the best fed we're the best clothed
with a better distribution of this
world's goods to all of our people than
any people in history now in pointing
out the things that are wrong i think we
ought to emphasize america's
strengths it isn't necessary to to run
america down in order to build her up
now so we get it absolutely clear
senator kennedy must as a candidate as i
as a candidate in 52 criticize us
when we're wrong and he's doing a very
effective job of that in his way but on
the other hand he has a responsibility
to be accurate and i have a responsibility
to correct him every time he misstates
the case and i intend to continue to do
so senator kennedy well mr nixon i'll
just give you the testimony of mr
george aiken senator george aiken the
ranking minority member republican
member and former chairman of the senate
agricultural committee testifying in
1959 said there were 26 million
americans who did not have the income to
afford a decent diet mr benson
testifying on the food stamp plan in
1957 said there were 25 million
americans who could not afford a
elementary low-cost diet and he defined
that as someone who uses beans in place
of meat now i've seen a good many hundreds
of thousands of people who are not
adequately fed you can't tell me that a
surplus food distribution of five cents
per person and that nearly six million
americans receiving that is adequate you
can't tell me anyone who uses beans
instead of meat in the united states and
there are 25 million of them according
to mr benson is well-fed or adequately
fed i believe that we should not compare
what our figures may be to india or some
other country that has serious problems
but to remember that we are the most
prosperous country in the world and that
these people are not getting adequate
food and they're not getting in many
cases adequate shelter and we ought to
try to meet the problem secondly mr
nixon has continued to state and he
stated it last week these fantastic figures
of what the democratic budget would
platform would cost they're wholly
inaccurate i said last week i believed
in a balanced budget unless there was a
severe recession and after all the worst
unbalanced budget in history was in 1958
12 billion dollars larger than in any
administration in the history of the
united states so that i believe that on
this subject we can balance the budget
unless we have a national emergency or
unless we have a severe recession
mr morgan with a question for senator
kennedy senator saturday on television
you said that you had always thought
that quemoy and matsu were unwise places
to draw our defense line in the far east
would you comment further on that and
also address to this question couldn't a
pullback from those islands be
interpreted as appeasement well the united
states uh has on occasion attempted uh mostly
in the middle 50s to persuade chiang
kai-shek to pull his troops back to formosa i
believe strongly in the defense of
formosa these islands are a few miles
five or six miles off the coast of red
china within a general harbor area and
more than 100 miles from formosa
we have never said flatly that we will
defend quemoy and matsu if it's attacked
we say we will defend it if it's part of
a general attack on formosa but it's
extremely difficult to make that
judgment now mr herter in 1958 when he was
under secretary of state said they were
strategically undefensible admirals
spruance and collins in 1955 said that
we should not attempt to defend these
islands in their conference in the far
east general ridgway has said the same thing
i believe that when you get into a
if you're going to get into a war for
the defense of formosa it ought to be
on a clearly defined line one of the
problems i think at the time of south
korea was the question of whether the
united states would defend it if it were
attacked i believe that we should defend
formosa we should come to its defense
to leave this rather in the air that we
will defend it under some conditions
but not under other i think is a mistake
secondly i would not suggest the
withdrawal at the point of the communist
gun it is a decision finally that the
nationalists should make and i believe
that we should consult with them and
attempt to work out a plan by which the
line is drawn at the island of formosa it
leaves 100 miles between the sea
but with general ridgway mr herter general
collins admiral spruance and many
others i think it's unwise to take the
chance of being dragged into a war which
may lead to a world war over two islands
which are not strategically defensible
which are not according to their
testimony essential to the defense of formosa
i think that uh we should protect our
commitments i believe strongly we should
do so in berlin i believe strongly we
should do so in formosa and i believe
we should meet our commitments to every
country whose security we've guaranteed
but i do not believe that that line in
case of a war should be drawn on those
islands but instead on the island of
formosa and as long as they are not
essential to the defense of formosa it's
been my judgment ever since 1954 at the
time of the eisenhower doctrine for the
far east that our line should be drawn
in the sea around the island itself mr
vice president
i disagree completely with senator
kennedy on this point i remember in the
period immediately before the korean war
south korea was supposed to be
indefensible as well
generals testified to that and secretary
acheson made a very famous speech at
the press club early in the year that
korean war started indicating in effect
that south korea was beyond the defense
zone of the united states
i suppose it was hoped when he made that
speech that we wouldn't get into a war
but it didn't mean that we had to go in
when they came in now i think as far as
quemoy and matsu are concerned that the
question is not these two little pieces
of real estate
they are unimportant it isn't the few
people who live on them they are not too
important it's the principle involved
these two islands are in the area of
freedom the nationalists have these two
islands we should not force our
nationalist allies to get off of
them and give them to the communists if
we do that we start a chain reaction
because the communists aren't after quemoy
and matsu they're after
formosa in my opinion this is the same
kind of woolly thinking that led to
disaster for america in korea i am
against it
i would never tolerate it as president
of the united states and i will hope
that senator kennedy will change his
mind if he should be elected gentlemen we
have approximately four minutes
remaining may i ask you to make your
questions and answers as brief as
possible consistent with clarity and mr
levy has a question for vice president
nixon mr vice president you are urging voters
to forget party labels and vote for the
man senator kennedy says that in doing
this you are trying to run away from
your party on such issues as housing and
aid to education
by advocating what he calls a me-too
program why do you say that party labels
are not important because that's the way
we elect a president in this country
and it's the way we should i'm a
student of history as is senator kennedy
incidentally and i have found that in the
history of this country we've had many
great presidents some of them have been
democrats and some of them have been
republicans the people some way have
always understood that at a particular
time a certain man was the one the
country needed now i believe that in an
election when we are trying to determine
who should lead the free world not just
america perhaps as senator kennedy has
already indicated the most important
election in our history it isn't the
label that he wears or that i wear that counts
it's what we are it's our whole lives
it's what we stand for it's what we
believe and consequently i don't think
it's enough to go before republican
audiences and i never do and say look
vote for me because i'm a republican i
don't think it's enough for senator
kennedy to go before the audiences on
the democratic side and say vote for me
because i'm a democrat that isn't enough
what's involved here is the question of
leadership for the whole free world now
that means the best leadership
it may be republican it may be
democratic but the people are the ones
that determine it the people have to make
up their minds and i believe the people
therefore should be asked to make up
their minds not simply on the basis
of vote the way your grandfather did vote
the way your mother did i think the
people should put america first rather
than party first now as far as running
away from my party is concerned senator
kennedy has said that we have no
compassion for the poor that we are
against progress the enemies of progress
is the term that he's used and the like all
that i can say is this we do have
programs in all of these fields
education housing defense that will move
america forward they will move her
forward faster and they will move her more surely
than in his program this is what i deeply
believe i'm sure he believes just as
deeply that his will move that way i
would suggest however that in the
interest of fairness that he could give
me the benefit of also believing as he
believes senator kennedy well let me say i do
think that parties are important in that
they tell something about the program
and something about the man abraham
lincoln was a great president of all the
people but he was selected by his party
at a key time in history because his
party stood for something the democratic
party in this century has stood for
something it has stood for progress it has
stood for concern for the people's welfare
it has stood for a strong foreign policy
and a strong national defense and as a
result produced wilson president
roosevelt and president truman the
republican party has produced mckinley
and harding coolidge dewey and landon
they do stand for something they stand
for a whole different approach to the
problems facing this country at home and
abroad that's the importance of party
only if it tells something about the
record and the republicans in recent
years not only in the last 25 years but in
the last eight years have opposed housing
opposed care for the aged opposed federal
aid to education opposed minimum wage and
i think that record tells something thank
you gentlemen neither the questions
from the reporters nor the answers you
heard from senator john kennedy or vice
president richard nixon were rehearsed
by agreement neither candidate made an
opening statement or a closing summation
they further agreed that the clock alone
would decide who would speak last and
each has asked me to express his thanks
to the networks and their affiliated
stations another program similar to this
one will be presented thursday october
13th and the final program will be
presented friday october 21st
we hope this series of radio and
television programs will help you toward
a fuller understanding of the issues
facing our country today and that on
election day november 8th you will vote
for the candidate of your choice this is
frank mcgee good night from washington